---
layout: post
title: bool4 and an unexpected new perspective
excerpt:
tags: []
---

This blog post is 20 paragraphs exposition and 2 paragraphs punchline. It is a follow-up to my [previous post]({% post_url 2025-03-25-vectorization %}) on vectorization. I mentioned there that Unity's math package implements `bool4` like this:
```
struct bool4
{
    [MarshalAs(U1)]
    public bool x;
    [MarshalAs(U1)]
    public bool y;
    [MarshalAs(U1)]
    public bool z;
    [MarshalAs(U1)]
    public bool w;
}
```
This is a 4 byte struct where every single byte represents a boolean. The C# spec mandates that `false` is represented by 0, and that `true` has _some_ representation other than zero. The particular representation is thus implementation-defined. In Unity's case, the most relevant implementation is IL2CPP, which represents this struct as 4 C++-bools ~~in a trenchcoat~~ in a struct, where `true` is represented by 1.

This is inconvenient since the typical result of a comparison of two `float4` in SSE a 128 bit vector, with components of either `0xFFFFFFFF` or `0x00000000`. This is readily usable as a mask for `_mm_and_ps` and friends. Alas, `bool4` does not fit[^fusion]. But I can't get rid of it, so I need to live with it.

Naively converting from the nice mask to the ugly `bool4` yields code like this:

```
movmskps     r8d, xmm0
movzx        eax, r8b
and          al, 1h
mov          byte ptr [rsp+8h], al
mov          eax, r8d
shr          eax, 1h
and          al, 1h
mov          byte ptr [rsp+9h], al
mov          eax, r8d
shr          eax, 2h
and          al, 1h
shr          r8d, 3h
mov          byte ptr [rsp+Ah], al
```

This uses `movmskps` to collect the top bit of the four floats into an `int32`, and then checks the bits of that int one-by-one.

Can we do better? Yes, we can! First, we can note that `bool4` we can still be treated as a `uint32_t`, which makes a lot of the handling (like binary and, or, xor) at least somewhat nice. We could also choose to not use 1 as the value for true and just settle for non-zero, but this would make comparisons for equality a little bit uglier and also runs the risk of not being compatible with some existing assumptions.

A nicer version might look like this:
```
__m128i v = _mm_castps_si128(_mm_cmpgt_ps(a, b)); // example
v = _mm_packs_epi16(v, _mm_undefined_si128());
v = _mm_packs_epi16(v, _mm_undefined_si128());
uint32_t mask = ((uint32_t)_mm_cvtsi128_si32(v)) & 0x01010101u;
```
We use a saturated pack, which turns 16bit integers into 8bit integers. The only two integers we care about are 0 and -1 (= 0xFFFF). Those just turn into 0 and -1 (= 0xFF). By doing this twice, we pack each four byte mask into one byte, and then we can just mask it to the bits we want to have and write the mask to the `bool4` directly. For example:
```
               00000000 FFFFFFFF 00000000 FFFFFFFF
packs_epi16 -> 0000FFFF 0000FFFF XXXXXXXX XXXXXXXX
packs_epi16 -> 00FF00FF XXXXXXXX XXXXXXXX XXXXXXXX
and         -> 00010001
```

So what about the inverse? `float4` uses `bool4` in `select(float4, float4, bool4)`, for example, and there it would be useful to go from the 32bit `bool4` to the full 128bit mask again. Let's pretend that we already have gone from a single bit to a mask of `00` and `FF`, e.g. `0x00010001` to `0x00FF00FF`. Going from this to the full 128bits again is just `_mm_unpacklo_epi8` twice:
```
__m128i v = _mm_cvtsi32_si128(mask);
v = _mm_unpacklo_epi8(v, v);
v = _mm_unpacklo_epi8(v, v);
```

For example:
```
                 00FF00FF XXXXXXXX XXXXXXXX XXXXXXXX // these upper bits are 0, but they are irrelevant
unpacklo_epi8 -> 0000FFFF 0000FFFF XXXXXXXX XXXXXXXX
unpacklo_epi8 -> 00000000 FFFFFFFF 00000000 FFFFFFFF
```

OK, cute. But none of this is why I decided to write a blog post (...not that my threshold for blog post writing is especially high...).

No, the noteworthy thing is this: How do we take that first step and go from `0x00010001` to `0x00FF00FF`? Well, we multiply by `0xFF`. Do you also see the convolution in the 'digit domain' here? It looks as if we are convolving `0x00010001` with `0xFF`, neat! I had never considered this before, and I am [not the first](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Sch%C3%B6nhage%E2%80%93Strassen_algorithm) to make this observation. But what a welcome new perspective on multiplication this is, even if it is very much not satisfying that it does not deal with carries: the Schönhage–Strassen algorithm I just linked to also does a convolution first and then deals with the carries as a separate step. For the purposes of bit manipulations, the convolution perspective still seems very useful.

Can I just say how utterly delighted I am that looking at something seemingly ugly (`bool4`) leads to a fresh new perspective, from a completely unexpected angle? Had I not also insisted on keeping single bits in `bool4` (instead of `0xFF`), this detour _also_ would not have happened. While I'm still not convinced that `bool4` is the right thing, I can now appreciate that it gave me _something_. Maybe I'll keep that in mind before I laugh again that Unity Mathematics also goes the full length and defines not just bool vectors, but also bool _matrices_: and who knows, maybe I will also learn something new by looking at `bool4x2` soon.

---

[^fusion]: A sophisticated compiler with knowledge of `bool4` would just eliminate all intermediate `bool4` instances in cases where we take a mask, then go to `bool4`, and then back to a mask. But that requires looking at multiple operations, and that's not what we are doing today.