---
layout: post
title: Compactification of spaces via Ultrafilters
excerpt: In which I complain about how compactness is introduced in topology classes
tags: [mathematics]
---

This is a sequel to my previous post about compactness via ultrafilters.

# Compactifications

For metric spaces, we have *the* metric completion (by adding the Cauchy-sequences modulo equivalence). It is not just the best completion, but also the *only*: You cannot take a sub of the completion (because you would still have non-convergent Cauchy-sequences) nor can you take a quotient (because of the triangle inequality). The analogue to completions are *compactifications*. A compactification of a space $X$ is a compact space $X'$ in which $X$ is dense, i.e. $X'$ is the closure $\bar{X}$ of $X$ in $X'$.[^closure] Unfortunately, there are generally many compactifications for a given non-compact space, so what is *the* best? What is the free compactification, where's the left adjoint?

This might be a good place to mention that compactifications are often defined as above *plus* the additional requirement that the space needs to be Hausdorff. This is a bit too strong for my taste (because the original space might not have been Hausdorff), but what one should require is some kind of separation on $X' \setminus X$ (the *remainder*), because otherwise you can just add in many set-theoretic points that are indistinguishable as topological points.

Compactifying a space is the act of stuffing all of its water-leaking holes with cork, that is, new points. Now sometimes it is convenient to use one big cork whereas otherwise you might want to use an uncountable number of small cork. The most general compactification will use the smallest cork, ideally one for every free ultrafilter.

Let us take a short look at the well-studied case of discrete spaces: If $X$ is discrete and infinite, its largest compacfitication is the Stone-Čech compactification $\beta X$[^stone-cech] and it consists of all ultrafilters on $X$, where $X$ is identified with the principal ultrafilters and the topology is generated by $\lbrace F \in \beta X \mid U \in F \rbrace$ for $U$ open in $X$. If you squint and remember that $U \in F$ means that $F$ describes a point that really ought to be in $U$, we can also pretend as if the opens did not change (as in: the space the opens covered didn't change -- we merely increased the number of points in the space they covered).

## Closure and ultrafilters
By definition, any compactification of $(X, \tau)$ has the latter as a dense subset. You may be aware that similarly to how you can define the closure of a subset via sequences in small spaces, you can use ultrafilters in the general case. Suppose $X' \supset X$. For notational convenience, let us write $F_K := \lbrace U \cap K \mid U \in F \rbrace$ for the *restriction* of $F \subseteq \mathcal{P}(X')$ to $U \subseteq X'$.
Now assume $(X', \tau')$ is a space extending $X$, i.e. $\tau = \tau'_X$. For any $p \in X'$, let us write $N(p) = \lbrace U \in \tau' \mid p \in U \rbrace$ for its neighborhood filter. Then $p$ is in the closure of $X$ if and only if the restriction $N(p)_X$ of $N(p)$ to $X$ is a filter.

**Proof.** Since $N(p)$ is already a filter, the statement is equivalent to saying that $\emptyset \notin N(p)_X$ if and only if $p \in \bar{X}$. But this is merely restating the definition of a point of closure. QED.

Now since by the ultrafilter lemma every filter extends to an ultrafilter, this is a round-about way of saying that any space that $X$ could be dense in might just as well be a space of ultrafilters of $X$. Then again, the set $\beta X$ of all ultrafilters of $(X, \tau)$ comes with the topology where the open sets are generated by the sets $\lbrace F \in \beta X \mid U \in F \rbrace$ for all $U \in \tau$. Assuming that $X$ is Hausdorff, we can then map each point $p \in X$ to its corresponding principal ultrafilter and get the largest compactification - just as we're used to in the construction of the Stone-Čech compactification of a discrete space. If $X$ is not Hausdorff then you have to be a bit more careful but essentially it's the same process.

---
---
---

[^closure]: In the metric case the closure of $X$ contains the limit of all sequences in $X$. In the general topological case, the closure can also be defined via ultrafilters.

[^stone-cech]: This is a bit of a tautology - the largest compactification of a space is *always* its Stone-Čech compactification because that is actually defined by this property. The construction via ultrafilters is just well known for the discrete case but is not what they originally used, I think.